a vegan diet
well to put it bluntly is incompatible
with human survival
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with ben
bickman ben welcome to the show oh tom
my pleasure thanks so much
dude i'm really excited to talk about
your book why we get sick
uh which is
really interesting and it's a take on
what most people call metabolic syndrome
that i've never heard before
because i would literally
seven minutes before beginning to
research you i would have said the
problems your glucose levels and the
fact that that is the very thing that
you like swat down in the first like six
words of your book um
walk us through that what's the
difference how is it possible that this
is not a glucose problem
yeah yeah so glucose like like i
mentioned in the book glucose is really
the side kick um here of the story and
to understand metabolic syndrome we need
to understand the
origins of that uh even the term
metabolic syndrome used to be called the
insulin resistance syndrome and i i
regret that we ever left that title
it's not that glucose itself isn't
valuable but it's that changes in
glucose really ought to be viewed
through the lens of insulin and
to to defend that paradigm let's imagine
an individual who's progressing from
perfect metabolic health to
metabolic disarray and at the end of
that would be type 2 diabetes type 2
diabetes really represents the the
prototypical metabolic disease which is
itself a disease of profound insulin
resistance now
to kind of take us there on that journey
through time
we would have an individual coming into
the clinic
and year over year we would be measuring
their glucose and we may see year upon
year that their glucose levels are
normal every time and yet other markers
of disease are getting worse maybe
they're gaining weight their blood
pressure is starting to climb that is
such a common one maybe they have some
fertility issues in women that would be
pcos and men that would be erectile
dysfunction but throughout all of this
the the physician starts to treat the
person's infertility or they start to
treat their hypertension but the glucose
stays normal and so they don't really
pay that any regard
however if we had been looking at
insulin through this
timeline we would have seen that while
glucose levels are staying normal the
insulin levels are going up in fact
going up by potentially multiples where
by the time that 10 or 20 years later
when we finally see the glucose starting
to change insulin had changed
multiples you know it's maybe four or
five times higher than it used to be and
if we shift the paradigm away from
glucose to insulin we not only detect
the problem significantly sooner indeed
potentially decades but we also treat
the problem much much better because the
the prevailing glucocentric paradigm is
that in type 2 diabetes
we have high glucose and we just need to
do whatever we can to lower the glucose
including pushing the insulin up even
higher than it was before
that works in lowering the glucose but
it reveals the the problem in that when
we lower the glucose the more
aggressively we're pushing up insulin to
lower the glucose the more we are
literally killing these individuals they
they get fatter and sicker and die more
by trying to push down the glucose while
pushing up the insulin again the
paradigm should be this is a high
insulin state which is insulin
resistance we need to lower that not and
then let the glucose take care of itself
yeah so this is interesting because um
i'll start poking at the predictions
that your hypothesis makes so
if i could lower sugar without
increasing insulin
then
i should be able to um abate the problem
because i still like glucose is still an
issue i'm assuming right
um oh absolutely um and i don't want to
i don't want to
derail that the point you're trying to
make yes and so i'll keep it brief
glucose is an issue but when type 2
diabetics are dying from heart disease
and and kidney failure
and other diseases and having
substantially increased risk of
alzheimer's it's not the glucose that's
doing that it's the insulin resistance
but that's not to say hyperglycemia
isn't pathogenic it is
but all the prototypical problems other
than maybe the blindness that we
associate with diabetes those are really
insulin problems
so what's cool about the hypothesis so
um
you know for anybody playing at home of
course the thing i'm talking about to
lower your glucose without um up
regulating your insulin is diet so avoid
things that have glucose in them and
suddenly your blood glucose goes down
um
so
all right that paradigm is interesting
so i can pull my glucose down it keeps
my insulin down and i'm going to be
healthier so it'll be interesting to
walk through
what the problems are that insulin
creates but first i actually want to
understand better what the problems are
that glucose creates so
why is elevated glucose a problem why
does the body work so hard because if i
understand right the difference between
uh normal and somebody who's diabetic is
a quarter of a teaspoon
of sugar in the bloodstream which is
crazy when you think about how much
blood you have in you and it's that fine
finely regulated so if my body is
willing to pour
this ultimately damaging hormone at
least in in um too high a level
what is it that becomes the pathological
problem if i just let my sugar be
elevated
yeah boy tom you're we're bringing up a
lot of very interesting and relevant
points here so gluco hyperglycemia is
acutely acutely lethal and chronic uh
chronically lethal or long-term lethal
and acutely um hyperglycemia can cause
a coma a non-ketotic coma it's called
where if your glucose levels get too
high and this would it depends on the
person but it's typically around 200
milligrams per deciliter at around that
range you are now you have a glucose
amount in your blood that the kidneys
cannot reabsorb
so as you have all the blood passing
through the kidneys um the glucose will
get filtered out and then it will get
pushed right back into the blood it'll
get reabsorbed through these glucose
transporters that are unique to the
kidney
however once we've gotten to that you
know around 200 low 200s
now what gets filtered out into the
urine or what would become urine cannot
get reabsorbed and so now we have
created what's called an osmolar
gradient basically this pull pressure
whereas the kidneys are now pulling in
too much glucose and keeping that
glucose they are demanding a certain
amount of water
to maintain a concentration that would
keep it somewhat comparable with the
rest of the body and so now the person
starts urinating out profound amounts of
water it's almost like a pressure valve
where the body knows that the long term
consequences of the glucose are going to
be disastrous and what
i want to really understand that so why
am i having why am i going into a coma
like what's happening at a cellular
level yeah so that is the acute one um
and that is that when when you're
urinating out too much water
all of that water is coming from the
blood
what's called the plasma of the blood
which represents the majority of what we
call blood and so naturally as volume as
the volume of blood starts to go down so
too does pressure pressure will go with
volume just that fundamental physical
principle and so the volume's coming
down pressure goes down and we are a big
column of water and the one tissue that
that is most susceptible to reductions
in blood pressure is the one tissue at
the top of this column of water namely
the brain if we don't have enough
pressure in the in the cardiovascular
system we literally cannot get blood up
to the brain and now the person will go
unconscious and we'll stay inside now
let me chase that what that hypothesis
would predict is if i could somehow keep
my blood pressure elevated i could
tolerate um
more blood sugar is that accurate you
could you absolutely could now but that
would lead us to the long-term
consequences which is the damage to
nerves and in in capillaries there are
two distinct mechanisms whereby
hyperglycemia or chronically elevated
glucose is going to damage
cells in capillaries and and nerves in
particular they appear to be very
susceptible to this one is the
activation of a receptor on all cells
all cells have this and it's called the
receptor for a glance advanced glycation
end products or rage that's the clever
little acronym
advanced glycation end products are
literally just molecules of taking a
glucose and binding it to amino acids
that are just circulating in the blood
so what ends up happening is that these
advanced glycation end products will
bind to these rage these receptors and
then they activate inflammation rage
actually is just what's called a pattern
recognition receptor it will recognize
all kinds of things that are generally
viewed as noxious stimuli so essentially
rage is just waiting there to be
activated if something messy comes
around and then it will say hey you're
yeah like like bacteria bacteria are a
big one so kind of infectious or harmful
agents in the body
rage is just waiting there to activate
the immune system and then what happens
when we have chronically elevated
glucose we have advanced glycation end
products chronically elevated and now
the body is is essentially activating
inflammatory pathways within cells all
the time and if a cell is activating
those pathways for too long it will
activate apoptosis it will basically say
i can't i can't do this anymore i need
to die and the second mechanism
is is actually somewhat related to the
topic i mentioned earlier about osmolar
gradients and trying to balance fluids
when when you have such a high level of
glucose many cells of the body
have open doors for glucose where the
glucose just comes in if there's a
higher amount of glucose outside the
cell than in then it just can't help but
pulling keep pulling the glucose in but
that overwhelms the cell's capacity to
burn the glucose and cells can't most
cells can't store glucose like the liver
can it can store glucose as glycogen the
muscle can do that too many cells of the
body don't have that capacity and so
that glucose
sits around and then it gets converted
eventually non-enzymatically it's just
this sort of process of the glucose
changing into a molecule called sorbitol
and sorbitol is membrane impermeable
once you have sorbitol in a cell it
literally can't go anywhere and so you
have more and more of this sorbitol
accumulating in say the endothelial
cells of blood vessels and then these
cells start pulling in more and more
water and then they burst
through this degeneration process they
basically get so full of water that they
pop
i love understanding this stuff at the
cellular level and look i'm so wildly
ignorant like it's crazy to me that i've
gotten to my age without having heard
any of what you're talking about right
now um so now walk us through what that
looks like as pathology and then my
next question will be
why the cells start to get annoyed
and start making it impossible to feed
them the glucose
yeah yes that this is great this is a
great progression one let me make one
other comment though that you you
touched on um or we were almost getting
to
and then you'd mentioned well
if if i need ever more insulin to
control my glucose why don't i just put
less glucose into the system that
strategy is so obvious
that it has led to multiple drugs being
developed that do nothing more than
there there's two classes of drugs one
it'll block the glucose from digesting
there's this class of drug that will you
can eat starch and you take this pill
and it doesn't allow your intestines to
absorb the glucose and so the glucose
stays in your guts and you sure you
might get some diarrhea
but then it never it never moves the
glucose into your bloodstream
alternatively in that same family of
drug you have one that you can take that
will actually force the kidneys to
excrete more of the glucose it
essentially accelerates that natural
limit or that that it lowers that
threshold um making the kidneys more
readily dumping out that glucose and
sure steal my blood pressure though well
sure you have to drink a lot more water
but it will work it'll lower your
glucose and that helps your insulin come
down but tom you touched on it so
accurately at the beginning if i'm
taking a drug that is going to block my
glucose from coming in and give me
diarrhea or i'm taking a drug that's
going to force the glucose into my
kidneys potentially
well drastically increasing urinary
tract infections and maybe even
increasing bladder cancer because cancer
and infections all love glucose why
don't i just take the rational
so obvious approach of just eating less
glucose but that's the one conclusion so
many in this diabetes space like genuine
and educated and even smart individuals
they they cannot they cannot get
themselves to that step they can nod and
write prescriptions for for glucose
inhibitors for digestion and glucose
pushers into the kidneys and yet never
just take a step back and say maybe i
should just tell the person to eat less
glucose that is really the logical
conclusion that's just being weighed
it's just waiting for the person to come
to and you over you've already i'm
obsessed with this idea of frame of
reference like everybody has a frame of
reference and i've heard you speak to
this with doctors you said look a
doctor's job is not to go research all
this stuff a doctor's job is to treat a
patient and when your frame of reference
from schooling from just the society
that you grow up in is hey there's a
drug for that
that's you know that's what you reach
for and that's exacerbated and now
welcome to sort of you know as as we all
have ones that we love that struggle
profoundly with um
food
relational issues i won't go all the way
to addiction but i think that would be
also a fair characterization
um
you see them you know doing themselves
uh great harm in terms of longevity in
terms of quality of life inflammation
um just the
level of adiposity that they're carrying
around
and you can tell them whether you're the
doctor or someone that loves them
whatever hey by the way just don't eat
carbohydrates and they won't do it and
so i imagine if you're a doctor day
after day after day your frame of
reference is already drugs and you see
the people the vast majority just can't
or won't make those changes you just
yeah there it is yeah no i think you're
absolutely right and i never intend to
paint all medical practitioners are such
a broad in such broad strokes uh
in fact that's part of the tragedy of
this all isn't it we're we're describing
this such a such an obvious conclusion
which is just eat fewer carbohydrates
and and yes that is such a simple idea
but that doesn't mean it's easy to put
in practice because to your point when
you start asking someone to change
habits
you are probably asking them to do the
most difficult thing they can do it's
just so much simpler to take a pill
and consequences be damned
yes and here's one insight that i think
a lot of people don't have they don't
recognize how much of their life is tied
to diet and i recently so i've i've been
on that train for
15 years thankfully just encountered the
right information at the right time this
does not make me clever it just
very luckily got onto that early
and even i about i don't know 12 months
ago ish
um i got into this thing where i was
making this like pecan pudding thing
dude it was so good and
i all of a sudden i was like oh man i've
got like crazy brain fog
and i'm tired all the time but it was
happening at a time where i was stressed
and i was just sort of losing my
enthusiasm for life and so i was just
like oh man you know i've got to change
something so you know what's going on
what's happening in my life
and i was like okay what advice would
you give to somebody if they came to you
with this problem and i would say it's
your diet man and so i'm like is it your
diet like you know about this stuff but
is it your diet and so i was like what
am i eating a lot of
i'm like i'm eating a lot of pecans
let's cut them out
literally 48 to 72 hours later gone so i
was just like oh my god
pain
uh joint pain especially
headaches
fatigue man oftentimes it comes down to
diet and so like when i hear people who
are are in chronic pain
i'm just like i'm telling you start with
your diet and so anyway just super super
anxious to have all the empathy in the
world for people struggling with that
like no judgment but
um you know i just want to see more of
them realize okay i can experiment with
my diet and make this pain go away
yeah that's this kind of empowering idea
and that was very much
part of my intention when i decided to
kind of roll up my sleeves and get that
book all together i imagined an
individual who would be going to their
medicine cabinet every morning and they
would pull out a medication for their
hypertension a medication for their
migraines and medication for their
infertility
and or even their diabetes and then and
at the end of this at the end of this
this like this conversation when they
realize wait so many of these problems
literally everyone i just mentioned but
so many of these chronic diseases that
we're all afraid of they seem like
they're distinct problems but to varying
degrees they're all trees they're all
branches from the same tree and rather
than continuing to prune these
individual branches that all inevitably
grow back with the medications we're
taking let's just cut the whole tree
down let's just get right to the roots
of this thing and get rid of the problem
and
so i it was this idea that it might be
empowering that rather than hopelessly
taking medications every day knowing
that the only the only future is
increasing the dose of those medications
let's actually address the the true
origins of the problem which again to
varying degrees is often going to be
insulin resistance
so now walk me into that pathology
because this is where the story really
starts to get interesting because so
yeah that i had no idea were related to
insulin
are direct
results of insulin yeah yeah so insulin
resistance which is my focus as a
scientist
is is very likely the single most common
health disorder in the world a paper
published in 2018 found that 88 of
adults in the us were considered
metabolically unfit in other words they
had some aspect of the metabolic
syndrome and again as i mentioned
earlier that's really the insulin
resistance syndrome so it doesn't take
too much of a logical step to say well
then 88 percent of adults have some
manifestation of insulin resistance so
can we and this is really simple and say
metabolically unfit just means it re
you're forcing your system to pump too
much insulin yeah in fact exactly in
fact that's a perfect segue to just
defining the villain so insulin
resistance is the villain and it's all
the rage nowadays to have a movie about
the origins of villains so let's let's
describe it so insulin resistance is is
two problems and this is so essential
those especially for those that are in
the low carb space where the term
insulin resistance
i believe gets invoked very
inappropriately in certain
settings um and you have to have both of
these phenomena occurring for it to be
insulin resistance one is the insulin
resistance itself and that is defined
at the level of the cell
what is insulin how is insulin acting at
the cell once upon a time one molecule
of insulin was capable say of of moving
this many molecules of glucose into the
cell and that's one of insulin's main
most famous actions where insulin comes
to the door of a cell knocks on the door
allows the glucose to then come in once
it's opened those glucose doors
um so so insulin can do that as well
that's part of the what we call insulin
resistance so insulin resistance is that
some cells of the body but not all
aren't responding to insulin as well as
they used to and that is a particular
problem in light of the second aspect
the second side of this coin that we're
calling insulin resistance which is the
hyperinsulinemia or in other words the
chronically elevated insulin levels you
that is the part that's overlooked
people will only want to mention the
insulin resistance part of it maybe the
elevated glucose levels
which again is really selling insulin
short as it has its hand in thousands of
biochemical reactions throughout the
body but even still
you cannot pull that apart from the
chronically elevated insulin there is no
situation of insulin resistance in the
body that that lacks the the um other
side of this namely the hyperinsulinemia
and that is the pathological side which
we're talking about now where someone is
noticing their blood pressure going up
or he's noticing his erectile
dysfunction those are very much
consequences of the insulin resistance
but do
that's the pathological insulin
resistance but there are states of
physiological insulin resistance where
the body is deliberately pushing up its
insulin and changing the efficacy of the
insulin throughout the body in order to
do something so it's serving a useful or
a physiological purpose but that only
happens in two instances it's puberty
and pregnancy in those instances where
the elevated the substantial increases
in insulin are facilitating a
substantial growth
and in pregnant mom it is basically her
body's way of saying
i'm about to undergo this metabolic
marathon growing this little human in my
belly and i need to make sure i have
enough fat to go through that whole
process if for some reason food became
scarce and so it really does serve a
purpose for mom to get fat and the
elevated insulin in that pregnancy
pregnancy-related insulin resistance
help that helps that happen but also
mom's elevated insulin helps the baby
grow and the baby get fat and a baby
must be fat when it's born to be healthy
in fact if a baby is too skinny
it's very likely the baby will suffer
from learning disabilities as the baby
grows as he or she grows because a bait
in fact tom it's a this i i hate that
i'm getting off topic but you steer me
back if we need to humans are the only
land-based mammals that are born obese
and we are the only animal that is born
with a brain and head a skull that is
bigger than the birth canal much to
mom's chagrin but we have these massive
metabolic
demands in our brain
and the baby must have enough fat
to make enough ketones to feed the brain
and if baby doesn't have enough fat when
babies born say because babies premature
then then we need to make sure we can
fatten that baby up as quickly as
possible
otherwise it's very very likely the
baby's going to have learning disorders
because it just wasn't getting enough
ketones to to fuel this incredible
growth of the brain during those newborn
years
okay god there's so much there um i want
to go back you had mentioned that not
all cells
get insulin resistant what cells do not
get insulin resistant
yeah that's a great question in fact i i
like to present this sort of paradigm
when i teach this idea to my students
you have some cells on one end um like
like uh muscle cells muscle cells can
become very insulin resistant that's a
problem because now they're not pulling
in glucose as well it's a problem
because insulin isn't defending the
proteins and now you could be breaking
down muscle proteins
and then just releasing those amino
acids but for no for no reason it's just
that the insulin isn't working then you
have a tissue like the liver
which
can can some of its aspects become
insulin resistant and some of the livers
processes stay insulin sensitive and
then you have some types of fat cells
like for example the the
the fat cells that a woman will have on
her butt and hips the what's called the
gluteal femoral fat depot or fat pad
those are fat cells that will
virtually forever maintain perfect
insulin sensitivity insulin will always
tell those fat cells to store more fat
but not all fat cells so like a guy fat
cells are where they're stored more
centrally around the abdominal area or
or even more
relevant the visceral fat cells the fat
cells that are within the abdominal
space and behind our behind our abs
behind our muscles um around our liver
and guts and kidneys those are those are
fat cells that can become insulin
resistant but so we have those the glute
the gluteal femoral fat cells which is
which is a subcutaneous fat that's a fat
that you can pinch and jiggle um those
maintain uh almost perfect insulin
sensitivity forever and
i don't know why uh uh it could be that
a woman has such a
the woman is going to bear the metabolic
burden of pregnancy and so that might
just represent a way to ensure that the
woman always has a place to store a
little extra fat should she need it and
if you think about the cell the fat
cells within the abdominal within the
visceral space surrounding our kidneys
and our liver and
etc in our intestines if we had
limitless potential to store fat there
it would literally crush all of those
essential organs you know it would be
expanding so much that it may even start
to put pressure on the lungs and the in
the heart and so then we die so that
it's we it makes sense that those fat
cells will become insulin resistant
because insulin tells fat cells to grow
and those cells essentially get to a
point of hypertrophy where they start to
tell insulin you want me to keep growing
but if i do we're going to die so for
the sake of the body i'm not going to
listen to you anymore and i'm going to
you want me to store more fat i'm going
to start i'm going to become insulin
resistant and i'm going to start leaking
fat that actually becomes a problem
overall but i would say it's a it's a
problem that we're willing to have
rather than you know crush our internal
organs but when you look at the the
woman on her butt and hips well there's
no harm in storing more fat there it is
literally not going to get in the way of
anything she might she might curse it
but but it is a nice place to store fat
and women store more fat in the
subcutaneous fat depots the fat beneath
the skin that you can pinch and jiggle
than men do men store relatively more of
their fat of course on their abdomen but
inside in the visceral space as well
so if you have a couple they got married
in college now they're both gaining 10
pounds you know every year or so
the man will start to suffer from the
consequences of that much much sooner
than the woman women
around his organs
yep that's exactly right women can get
fatter than men do you think the reason
that nature is doing that is because we
don't have to bear children
oh i i do yeah and in fact that that
difference in how we're storing fat is
entirely under the control of sex
hormones androgens testosterone like are
are promoting the fat storage in the
abdominal and even visceral space
estrogens in contrast are very much
stimulating the storage of fat
in that subcutaneous space especially
the button hips but also the arms and
the breasts and all those prototypical
female spots so that's under the control
of the sex hormones that's why
little tommy and little jane as they
grow up through puberty they start to
look so different it's because the sex
hormones are telling the body where to
store the fat not how much though
insulin is telling the body how much fat
to store the sex hormones are just
telling the body where to store it and
how
and how to store it whether it's growing
through making new fat cells what's
called hyperplasia which is what's
happening on the um the fat at the butt
and hips or whether it's hypertrophy
which is usually what's more happening
around the abdomen or in the visceral
thing okay so now we're back to the uh
the pathology of elevated insulin
when you were describing all the things
that i just always thought of
honestly i defaulted to thinking of them
as a reaction to elevated glucose
so um you know damage to the epithelial
lining of the vasculature like things
like that what what is happening
and what is it that that what are the
properties of insulin that cause that
yeah yeah well it would depend on the
specific pathology but you mentioned the
endothelium or the epithelial lining of
the blood vessels so that's a really
nice
place to to kind of define or identify
part of what's happening with insulin
resistance
now to put all this in perspective
um as one step back and then i'll step
right back into it
insulin has an effect on literally every
single cell of the body
there is not a single cell in the body
that doesn't have insulin receptors
every cell will respond will respond to
insulin in some way it doesn't matter
what it is now the endothelial cells are
a fascinating
example because they have multiple ways
to respond to insulin and and this is um
very illustrative of how insulin
resistance is virtually in every
instance the the cause of hypertension
so if someone listening to this has been
told they have hypertension and they've
been struggling with it for years or
they're taking a drug for it i can
almost guarantee it's because they have
insulin resistance it is very uncommon
for that to be an exception so there
there are several distinct mechanisms um
but but i mentioned one where insulin
will come to the endothelium
and it will it will bind to the
endothelial cells and it will induce the
production of a molecule called nitric
oxide
now that is not something that happens
at other cells of the body and so this
is just reflective of how unique insulin
is at different cells it will tell
different cells to do different things
and so it comes to the endothelial cells
it stimulates the production of nitric
oxide which will relax the smooth
muscles of the blood vessel and now we
have dilation and so that's changing the
way we're moving blood around and
systemically throughout our body that
helps the blood pressure be a little
lower because the blood vessels are a
little wider and so now the pressure has
gone down but at the same with an
erection you need that dilation to
facilitate greater blood flow into that
area and so that's that's the problem
and in fact indeed that is the problem
in in hypertension and chronically when
someone puts on the blood pressure cuff
and they see their blood pressure is
high part of that problem is that
insulin isn't working well and insulin
used to induce this vasodilation because
of nitric oxide and now it doesn't
insulin is still there it's pounding on
the door of the endothelium the
endothelium isn't working anymore
so that's one effect but then other ways
that insulin is affecting hypertension
insulin
amplifies the sensitivity to
catecholamines like epinephrine when
when epinephrine is high it will induce
vasoconstriction and it will induce the
heart it will stimulate the heart to
beat harder and faster in in chronically
elevated insulin the insulin is pushing
up the epinephrine in the body so it's
amplifying this this kind of
anxious like state where the blood
vessels are constricting the heart is
beating harder and then overall we have
an increase in blood pressure
another maybe one more just because i
would dominate this for too long insulin
also stimulates the release of a hormone
called aldosterone
and aldosterone is the main hormone that
tells the kidneys to hold on to salt and
water and so if you're eating a diet
that's keeping your insulin high that's
going to artificially push up your
aldosterone and the consequence of that
is going to be that the kidneys are now
retaining too much salt and water and of
course that means blood volume goes up
and as blood volume goes up blood
pressure goes up and now our blood
pressure is potentially getting high
enough that it may hurt blood vessels so
those are several distinct mechanisms in
fact i ended up bringing in you know
multiple different angles but to varying
degrees you have this happening in the
hippocampus which is compromising
glucose use which is necessary for
memory and learning which is why they
call alzheimer's disease
insulin resistance of the brain you have
this happening to blood vessels in the
brain
where they don't dilate as well they
don't they aren't as dynamic and that
can lead to migraines and that is why
people who adopt low carb diets can in
many instances have a complete cessation
of migraines they may never have another
migraine again
um and and and and many many more
pathologies polycystic ovary syndrome
which is one i've alluded to a few times
now which is the most common infertility
in women
that is directly a result of too much
insulin in the body preventing the
ovaries from releasing a big spike of
estrogens and if you don't have that big
estrogen spike you do not have ovulation
and so the woman has ovaries that are
making lots of follicles throughout the
menstrual cycle or the ovulatory cycle
getting ready to ovulate
but the insulin is preventing it from
actually ovulating and now all those
follicles just stick around in the
ovaries making the ovaries get bigger
and bigger and bigger
it is it is not to be trifled with all
right so yeah we have just put
told everybody how they're getting
themselves in trouble now let's get them
out you do a great job of talking people
through this diet exercise what are what
are the keys
yes yes so in fact let's start with the
simple one which is exercise
any kind of exercise is going to be
beneficial
and that's because uh two two reasons
one during exercise itself insulin must
come down somewhat it's just it is
incompatible even just for survival
really to be exercising and insulin
staying high because now muscles are
using the glucose and therefore there's
no reason to inject the insulin
yeah yeah in fact yes that's a part of
it where if insulin is up insulin wants
to
store energy it is it is not allowing
the liver to share its glucose it is not
allowing the fat cells to share their
fat um and so that is of course not
conducive to exercising you need those
tissues to be sharing their energy so
that the hungry muscle can be pulling it
all in and so insulin comes down during
exercise now to the to the astute
listener they'd be saying wait a minute
ben you and tom were just saying how you
need insulin to move glucose into the
muscle
not when you exercise that is a genius
in the design of the muscle cell it has
insulin independent doors for the
glucose so the moment you have a muscle
that is going through that dynamic
contraction and relaxation
you open those glucose stores without
insulin ever having income ever having
come knocked on them so it's an insulin
independent mechanism so it
that wow i've never heard that before so
muscle cells do not need insulin then
why do other cells need insulin because
is it going back to that sort of idea of
like hey even between men and women we
have to like you know move this stuff
around differently so we need sort of
the middle man that's gonna you know
partition this and you know send this to
the right places
yeah well in fact let's just burst the
balloon um
very very few cells of the body
actually need insulin for glucose uptake
like the liver that i mentioned a moment
ago insulin will tell the liver what to
do with the glucose but it doesn't tell
the liver to take it in most of the
cells of the body are they can pull in
glucose without the need of insulin and
so that's part of the tragedy of how we
define insulin through by just nature of
what it does to glucose when the reality
is only a handful of cells actually
respond to insulin with glucose uptake
and that is muscle and fat and heart and
then
some parts of the brain so in the grand
scheme of things that's that's a
profoundly small number
but the muscle
is so hungry during exercise that it
just basically tells insulin look in
when i'm when i'm at rest
you're the boss
but when i'm exercising i'm the boss i'm
gonna get what i need and so it
basically pushes insulin to the side and
again that's a good thing because
insulin comes down and now that working
muscle can clear the blood of glucose
and so we have that acute benefit of
insulin coming down then we have the
long-term benefit which is at the back
end of all of this our glucose is going
to be better controlled because we've
been exercising and now the insulin
doesn't have that pressure to be higher
as it is
i wore a continuous glucose monitor for
i don't know probably six months hey
it's super fun anybody watching this
episode if you've made it this far trust
me when i say you'd really enjoy it
um and
i had ice cream
and my blood sugar went from like
to
178 in like 20 minutes maybe a little
bit longer but it was fast
and so i started doing air squats
and
i must have done close to 300. it was to
the point where i was like i'm either
just going to accept that you know i
have this crazy uh blood sugar spike or
i'm never eating ice cream again because
i don't want to do 300 air squats again
it takes hours
um and but it dropped my blood sugar
back down
i think
if memory served it dropped it back down
to either right around 100 or even back
under 100. i i literally i had heard
people say a million times hey exercise
really helps like if you're pre-diabetic
go exercise just like why would that be
true
and in doing that and seeing like oh my
god like my muscles are obviously
gobbling
up the sugar from the bloodstream yeah i
was really shocked at how how profound
the effect the measurable effect was
yeah in fact i that's that exact
phenomenon is why which plays out in
multiple studies in humans is that's why
i recommend that when someone has eaten
their most starchy meal of the day go on
a walk just get out and do something
whatever that
whatever that meal was or that that
treat that spiked your glucose get out
and walk just go on a 20 minute walk or
something and you will much more rapidly
bring that down what might be elevated
for a few hours may only be elevated for
an hour if you get out and do something
yeah it's crazy um that's super
interesting okay so
exercise good muscles have a unique door
that's really going to pull in the uh
the glucose so
now talk to me about
diet
right right so this is the elephant in
the room um in fact
far far more relevant than exercise as
much as i am an advocate of exercise
there are even exercise studies that
find that if you exercise and then you
follow that up with high carb meals then
you mitigate you undo the insulin
sensitizing effect of the exercise
itself just touching on the fact that if
you try to compare diet to exercise diet
will beat the hell out of exercise
as a variable for insulin resistance now
when it comes to diet the principles i
think there are to me
i've attempted to sort of distill these
ideas to four principles and they are so
simple but again at the very beginning
of our conversation we both realized and
acknowledged that doesn't mean they're
easy
but
assuming that someone would want to hear
them anyway and then they can make their
own choice i would say the very first
principle needs to be control
carbohydrates now i'm not saying you
don't eat any but carbohydrates are not
essential to humans so put that in
perspective then when when you're
looking at a big spread of carbohydrate
heavy foods
um this is that is the macronutrient
that is the biggest offender it will so
i could live my entire life and never
eat a carbohydrate and
be
fine are we prepared to stand by that
statement
oh to 100 in fact indeed tom even the
most dogmatic dietitian has to even
reluctantly admit that um
it is it is literally the stuff of
dietitian in dietetics textbooks
carbohydrates are not essential to
humans again that's an unpopular
sentiment nowadays especially but it
doesn't change the reality of either
micro there is no i won't get unless i
eat well yeah yeah that's a good
question so um there there are certainly
and so let me be nuanced here
there are plants that can be beneficial
in part of a healthy diet but that does
in no way mean they're essential there
is there's certainly no such thing as an
essential carbohydrate
and in fact we know people um i know i'm
friends with sean baker everyone knows
about him
i mean talk about a beast that guy
literally eats nothing but steak
that's crazy the the whole carnivore
thing is really interesting to me um but
all things being equal i don't care
right so as long as everything's being
done ethically and the animals are you
know treated well and rearranged and all
that stuff and the only bad day they
have is the day they die and you make
that as wonderful as as you possibly can
um
i don't care so i just want to know
what's going to help me be healthier
longer
and i know you have
some interesting concerns about a vegan
diet and i would love to to hear
um what you think it's missing if
anything i don't want to put words in
your mouth
yeah yeah yeah in fact that this plays
well still into that first rule with
controlling carbohydrates but yeah a
vegan diet
um well to put it bluntly is
incompatible with human survival um and
so i liked it real smooth yeah yeah yeah
so now that's not to say there could be
a vegan listening to this and they're
saying well forget you ben i'm doing
fine but it is a privilege of the elite
you have to be educated enough to know
what your deficiencies are and you have
to be wealthy enough to afford the
supplements now the deficiencies are
going to be iron and someone could say
i'm getting all my iron from my plants
no you're not that doesn't work you you
cannot get iron from from from broccoli
to any measurable amount or even the
right kind that's going to influence
your iron so you have vegans who will
suffer from iron deficiency anemia
almost all the time
they will suffer from vitamin b12
deficiencies which are is impossible to
get from any plant whatsoever and and
that leads to something called
pernicious anemia and that is something
that vegan mom actually can pass on to
vegan baby but the baby will be
identified as failure to thrive the baby
won't be meeting normal kind of growth
metrics and in cognitive metrics because
of the lack of b12 in mom's diet which
is then passed into the milk or not
passed into the milk but you need
vitamin b12 for cells to divide and so
the newborn baby which is experiencing
such explosive growth a lot of that
growth is happening because of
hyperplasia cells dividing and we the
reason we tell a mom to get folate is so
that the cells of the fetus that little
growing baby can divide but if you don't
have b12 the folate can't work in the
first place that's sort of the other
side of this concern
folate and b12 work hand in hand to
allow cells to divide and you cannot get
b12 from plant sources it it it's
impossible
you have to get it from animal sourced
foods so that those so pernicious anemia
and and on any disease related to a
failure of cells to divide would follow
that and then just one last one would be
the essential omega-3s for the brain dha
and epa
and a vegan would say well i'm getting
alpha linoleic acid
or linolenic acid ala which is the the
plant-based omega-3 and i would say
that's all fine and dandy
you cannot humans can't convert enough
of that over to constitute the omega-3s
of epa and dha which are so essential
for brain development in fact that goes
back to the growing baby in the
developing baby and baby's brain as well
which has a very high need for omega-3s
um and so so there are multiple
deficiencies and those are just some of
the obvious
ones very interesting okay so we are
controlling carbohydrates yeah you're
having uh some animal protein for sure
yep in fact that's the second point fat
yep yeah that's the second point
prioritize protein and it has to come
from animal sources
in my mind it's very clear there's no
question animal sources are superior
it is it is i think very unfortunate
this growing trend of trying to get
protein from plants now i know this is
delicate because some people have a lot
of strong feelings about this kind of
thing but
the the consequences when you're trying
to get your protein from plants is you
very often will become protein deficient
because the plants won't have the full
complement of amino acids or in the
right levels
they are not as bioavailable this is
documented you aren't moving those in as
well and part of that could be that
plant proteins have honest to goodness
molecules in them that inhibit the
digestion of the proteins phytic acids
tannins trypsin inhibitors these are
things that just occur in in these
plants they're in peas they're in soy
and when we take a thousand peas
and concentrate them to get one serving
of protein
the protein is what we want what we
don't want is all the other stuff coming
with it like these molecules that block
digestion we also get potentially
dangerous levels of heavy metals like
lead and arsenic because plants these
seeds of the plants will naturally
concentrate these minerals from the
ground now if you and i just ate a
handful of peas that's such an
inconsequential amount as to not be
relevant but it's also an
inconsequential amount of protein so if
we want to try to get enough protein
from peas we end up getting these other
things that we don't want but
nevertheless prioritize protein and then
if you're getting it from animal sources
that's going to come with fat because in
nature the best proteins always come
with fat and that's good because it
helps us digest the protein better and
fat and protein are more anabolic than
protein alone so there's something
anabolic about the fat and so don't fear
fat and then the fourth principle really
fast before you move off that one and
get to the fourth one um where do you
come down on eggs yeah so i think eggs
are god's if or nature's most perfectly
packaged food it is a one-to-one mix of
protein to fat by mass and i think that
is well i joke it's like it's a divine
mix but that is the exact mix that this
study that i just mentioned showed where
they had they had weight lifters take
egg white which is egg white and whey is
the best demonstrably the best proteins
in humans and then they had so they had
them take egg whites alone and detected
a significant increase in muscle protein
synthesis and then they had them take
the whole egg which is by mass one to
one there's an equal amount of mass of
egg white to yolk and now they got a
significant growth of the muscle beyond
just the egg white alone
i eat a lot of eggs so i'm i'm very
happy to hear that um okay so the fourth
pillar bucket
yep yep the fourth pillar is fasting um
and this doesn't need to be anything
complicated it's funny how complicated
something can be of just not eating you
know we've made it so complicated and so
i i and i don't i don't really try to
come down on any particular version of
that
um there are so many different ways to
do it
full multi-day fasts or just within
24-hour time-restricted eating windows
my only advice is if someone's going to
engage in time-restricted eating like in
186 where they fast for 18 hours and eat
for six i would say when you can try to
push that eating window to the beginning
of the day that is better than pushing
it to the end of the day
there are metabolic improvements that
come with it there are studies that have
compared that but also practically
speaking
it's just
so much easier to indulge in junk food
when you're eating in the evening but if
your eating window has has stopped with
lunch
you're you just don't indulge you're not
is you're not as tempted um but i
appreciate that socially awkward you
know dinner at least for me i'm a
husband i'm a father
not eating dinner is just weird because
i want to have that moment with my
family so despite me saying that it
doesn't i'm not trying to pretend that
it's easy to do
but but if someone can do it
it's better to have the eating window be
earlier in the day than later yeah i
have my last meal at about 1 15.
yep that's a great way to do it it
really is honestly for years i did it
the other way and i thought oh breakfast
is you know super easy to skip and so
i'll do lunch and dinner and then i just
found myself in the mornings i'd be so
distracted and i'm like oh you know i
hope i have like a meeting where i have
to be responsive versus where i need to
be creative because i can do meetings
all day in a fasted state no problem but
i'm not as creative and maybe other
people are but for me it's i'm not
and uh so finally i was like well wait a
second i start getting tired in the
evenings anyway why don't i start
ending my meal much earlier so because
of my sleep schedule i go to bed very
early so i get up really early so
i don't eat probably for about four to
five hours in the morning anyway but i'm
still having my first meal at like 9 30.
um and then that's a great way to do it
115 years what you came to intuitively
is certainly supported by the data but i
came to you through a lot of pain and
suffering i am the most like i have done
everything from a health perspective
like the hardest dumbest way possible i
spent like three years in rabbit
starvation i got lean but because all i
was eating was protein i heard
everywhere
and yep it was god awful i mean it was
god awful i was lean and i looked great
but whoa i did not feel good in fact
that is so important because there is i
am i am a huge defender of protein but i
i
vehemently disagree with the idea that
you need to focus on protein at the
expense of something like fat i think
that we are denying nature if when we're
teasing those two apart and and i think
it's not a it's not it's interesting
that our ancestors even here in the
united states in the early 1900s we
didn't eat chicken
we had the we didn't if you look at the
consumption of meat patterns in the
united states chicken as a meat was
almost nothing for decades decades
decades and then it exploded in the
mid-1900s right around the time we
started vilifying saturated fat and fat
in general and chicken meat is so lean
we didn't used to eat the chickens we
kept them for their eggs and so when we
this modern focus on protein i i do
appreciate
really the utility of protein and the
value of emphasizing it very much
but to to pull that away from the fat
leads us to i think an unhealthy way of
eating
so interesting
ben you are fascinating i loved your
book i have so enjoyed my time with you
where can people
follow you dive in deeper get more
insights where's the best place yeah
yeah thanks so much tom this was great
yeah so um everyone can check out the
book it's why we get sick
and i am fairly active mostly on
instagram these days and people can find
me there at ben bickman phd and then i
invite everyone go check out
two kind of
ventures i'm involved with one is a
coaching platform just to try to create
a nice simple online low-carb coaching i
don't do the coaching but i helped
create the
kind of the curriculum i guess and
people can find that at insuliniq.com
and then lastly
just a little while ago i started a
company called health code and health is
spelled hlth people can go to that
website at get health hlth.com and that
was really just born from
my my
view that as valuable as a low-carb diet
is it's sometimes hard for people to do
it and we've touched on that even in
this conversation so i just thought no
one had really done a low carb shake
that great yet and so it's a low carb
high fat high protein in that one to one
ratio that divine ratio that i mentioned
earlier
and if anyone wants to
make a purchase please use ben 10 um my
my name ben 10 for a 10 off the order
amazing dude thank you so much this is
wonderful guys trust me his book why we
get sick
absolutely phenomenal he's got such a
unique take that you guys just went on a
ride and got to enjoy uh it's amazing
you will be richly rewarded and speaking
of things that are rewarding if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you